# Conference Recording

I have looked at many different ways of recording conferences, from the basic
all the way to the multi-hundred-thousand pound solutions, and have found out a
lot of interesting (and useless) information along the way. This has stemmed
from my recent forray into videography, and all the new knowledge and tech that
comes from that way.

This post will be a look into what I have found out, lessons I have learnt, and
some things you can look at for sorting this out for your own conference. I'll
go over most of this in a fairly linear fashion, starting form what you need to
consider and plan before the event, all the way through to the multi-hour (or
even day/week!) slog of editing and uploading.

## In the beginning...

So maybe not that far back, but atleast there are a few things to consider
before you go into this. The first major thing is: What are you actually aiming
to do? There are 3 main choices:

* Record the event to upload later
* Stream the event live
* Both of the above

Each of these have massive differences in considerations, especially the last
one, as that adds more complications than the previous two combined. With
recording the event to opload later, you have to consider storage of all the
recordings, but dont have to worry about internet connection at the event - and
possibly not even worrying about network at the event. This is the easiest of
all the choices, as you're only concentrating on one thing at any one time -
recording everything, then editing everything.

With streaming the event live, things get a lot more complicated. Now you not
only have to capture all the items you need, you also need to bundle them up
(or compose them) into some useful way, encode them, and then stream them out
over the internet to some service.  Note that here I am assuming that when you
stream the event, you want to be able to go back and watch the items you
streamed later, so they have been recorded somewhere as you streamed (though
not necessarily recorded by you).

So with that out of the way, now you can start looking at what you need. Lets
start with what you need as a basis for all of the above methods.

## And then there was sound

So the most important thing about recording any conference, or talk, is
actually not the video - its the audio. So the first major part is a way to
capture your speaker so that they can be heard clearly. There are actually a
few considerations to make for this, as it depends on the venue itself -
namely, do they already have a PA system in place? Some conference venues may
already have desk mounted, hand held, or even full wireless lavalier mic setups
available, at which point using what is at hand is a great start, and one less
thing you will need to purchase or worry about. However having a backup or
second method for capturing audio is always a good idea, and not assuming that
the venue actually has this set up is also worth considering.

So the first part would be, what kind of microphone setup do you want? As said
earlier, there are 3 options for this - desk mounted, hand held, or lavalier
mount. There are obvious advantages and drawbacks for each.

The desk mounted one is most definitely the easiest to set up, however if your
speaker moves away from where the mic is set up, then the sound clarity may
drop - especially if the mic you've chosen is very directional, or the speaker
is quiet. You can always warn your speakers about this, however this relies on
your speaker remembering half way through their talk - and I've had a few that
have forgotten in the first few words of their talk that they should stay in a
particular spot. However, as long as it continues recording you will not need
to tell your speaker anything else, and if it gets forgotten it will still pick
up most of the audio without needing to do much more.

The hand-held option is better, as it will then follow the speaker around, but
if there is no PA system in use it may seem a bit weird, as there is no obvious
need for it - it feels a bit redundant talking into it, and theres no
feedback for how loud they are speaking in to it for them to regulate their
volume. I would probably reccomend this option to if you're using an external
PA system to amplify the speaker, at which point its a lot easier to justify.

The third option of a lavalier microphone is my personal favourite, however does require a little more work of setup for each talk - the mic needs to be retrieved from the previous speaker, and attached to the new one. But once it's set up, theres little else that needs to be done, and the speaker can quite happily wander anywhere (assuming its a wireless option, ofcourse!).

That, however is just the pickup. The other thing to consider is the capture of
the audio, which depends on your decision at the beginning. If you're recording
items to edit later, then basically any audio recorder which will take a mic
input will suffice - in fact there are recorders which have a decent microphone
built in, so at a pinch you can get away with treating it as a handheld. My
personal set up is a Zoom H1, which is a great little recorder that will run
for a whole day off one AA battery, records at great quality, and then
combining that with a lavalier mic, makes for a great little portable setup
that you can just shove in a pocket - or Duct Tape to the speaker (hi VM
Brasseur!).

If you are planning on streaming the talk, then things are a little more
complex. You need to get the audio from the mic to your streaming system (which
we will go over later!) which means you either need a long wire from the mic
(which can cause issues for the speaker) or a wireless setup (which will cost a
lot more).

Note that this only really affects the length of cable you require, rather than the mics themselves - although with lavalier mics they tend to have either a fairly short cable or a REALLY long one - but extensions do exist.

So, now you have a few considerations for the audio, lets move on to the video!

## Slide on by

The next major thing about a talk, is the slides. The first things to consider
for this is, what input are you planning on using? The main two are HDMI and
VGA, but there are other considerations to take into account from this - what
input does the venue projectors accept? what resolution? Are the presenters
going to be using macs (most likely a few at least!). That last one is an
interesting problem actually, not least due to the 'dongle' dilema of having
the correct connector for their machine.

The easiest one to handle is actually HDMI - at least from a capture
perspective. However this is very quickly thrown for a spin, due to various
things, including 'HDCP' or High Definition Copy Protection - something that is
enabled (and pretty much enforced) on Mac HDMI outputs, as well as a few other
HDMI outputs. This makes capturing it a lot more difficult, but not impossible
- you can either get a recorder that decodes HDCP (although that is not
condoned, and many HDMI interfaces on the market dont actually allow this
without you voiding at least some form of warranty or risking completely
breaking the device) - or you can use VGA.

Ok, in fact you will most likely end up using HDMI - however you can get VGA to HDMI adapters for really cheap, and they are surprisingly reliable - some even allow you to add audio to the converter.

## Toybox

TODO: flesh this out more

* RODE Videomic Pro
* Sony Lav Mic
* Zoom H1
* Audio interface (pic one...)
